---
l1Cat: "Coursework"
l2Cat: "Unit 2"
l3Cat: "Section 00 - Schema"
title: "20A - Designing a schema"
layout: "../../../../layouts/Coursework.astro"
---
# Database schema design
**Overview: For this project you will construct a relational database design for a generic housing authority**

## Grading
For each of the requirements that you fulfill in the database design section, you will receive the listed number of points. All tables must be in at least 2NF, and if all of your tables can maintain 3NF, you will receive a bonus multiplier of 1.5x. You may notice that although this is a 150 point assignment, you can earn up to 300 points. Any excess points that you earn will be divided by 2 and used as bonus points. These extra bonus points will be applied to your unit 1 tests, up to a maximum 75 bonus points, and 330 total points.

## Database design
Imagine you work for the public housing agency of a city, and you have been charged with keeping track of who is living in the agency's apartments over time. To help you in this task, you have decided to use a relational database for your record keeping. Your task is to design a database that allows you to capture the facts described below:
- The city has three public housing developments. You want to record their names, locations, the year they opened, their height in stories, and the year in which they last had significant renovation. (25 points)
- For each apartment unit in each development, you want to keep track of the number of bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, whether the unit has a separate kitchen or living room, and the square footage. (25 points)
- The database should keep track of the households living in the units as well as the individuals living within each household. For each member of a household, you want to record their name, date of birth, sex, and indicate whether or not they are the head of the household (more than one person can share that distinction but, for the purpose of this exercise, assume that each household has a single 'head'). (50 points)
- You also want to keep track of when a household moved into and out of a particular unit. You want to be able to follow households as they move from one unit to another or from one development to another. Think about how you will find the unit that the household is currently occupying (i.e., what query would you write to find the current unit of each household). (75 points)  
  
To earn full credit for each section, you should clearly describe the table(s) you would create, their columns, and any relations between them and other tables. You must also clearly indicate the primary, candidate, and any foreign keys for each table. Additionally, you should also describe any joins that you would use to find the requested information from your designed table. Finally, you will earn another 10 points for each section that you include in an entity-relation diagram. This diagram should clearly show the tables, columns, and their relations.

## Some Advice
Follow this process while designing your database. Keep in mind that there is not single 'right' answer (but lots of wrong ones). Also, you may think of complexities that go far beyond what you need to think about for the purpose of this homework set. For example, don't worry about how to record births/deaths over time, renovations that change the size and attributes of apartments, etc.. Focus on a schema that handles the basics by recording the basic characteristics of housing units and individuals and keeping track of which households occupy which units over time. The goal is to have a relational schema that handles one-to-many and many-to-many relationships appropriately and supports SQL queries that can answer basic questions like, "Was household X ever in Unit Y?" or "Has Individual Z ever lived in more than one housing unit?" or "What is the vacancy rate for a development during the past two years?" or "How many households have lived in their current housing unit for more than two years?" Think about the database design problem and identify the entities involved, their attributes, and the relationships among them.  
  
You may be interested to know that this assignment was originally inspired by records kept by the Boston Housing Authority (during the late 1990s) about their developments. This type of problem has definite real-world importance. The BHA is big enough to (eventually) hire consultants to design and implement their tenant tracking system, but many smaller non-profits and community groups face similar data management problems (with time-varying data and one-to-many relationships) in order to track their clients, projects, funding sources, workshops, etc. A little relational thinking about how to structure the data can greatly facilitate data maintenance, data integrity, and the practicality of subsequent program analysis.

---

You may be interested to know that your project for this section is an altered version of an actual MIT problem set assigned in one of their database design classes. If you are interested in seeing the original version of this problem, you can find it [here.](http://web.mit.edu/11.521/www/problemsets/problemsetc.html)

