---
l1Cat: "Coursework"
l2Cat: "Unit 0"
l3Cat: "Section 00"
title: "001 - Getting connected"
layout: "../../../../layouts/Coursework.astro"
---

# Getting connected
This lesson will walk you through the process of getting your computer connected to the development server. The procedure is different depending on what computer you have, and what operating system you are running, so ensure that you are reading the correct set of instructions. In class, we will be doing the setup in stages, so please stay with the rest of the class as we go. If you have any questions, don't hesitate to ask.

## Phase 1: Installing VScode
### Windows and mac users
Please download and install [Visual studio code](https://code.visualstudio.com/).

### Chromebook users
The installation procedure for your platform is more complicated, but don't worry! After setup is complete, you will be able to participate just like everyone else. Follow the instructions [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/blogs/2020/12/03/chromebook-get-started) to get started.

## Phase 2: Installing your SSH key
### Chromebook users
1. Download the SSH key file that you were emailed
2. Right click on your downloads folder, and select share with linux
3. Open your terminal, and enter the following command exactly: `cd /mnt/chromeos/MyFiles/Downloads`
4. Type the following command verbatim, replacing the entire section in brackets, including the brackets themselves. `cp ./{keyfile} ~/.ssh/id_ed25519`. For example, if my keyfile was called enzo-key, I would run `cp ~/enzo-key ~/.ssh/id_ed25519`.
4. Type the following verbatim into the terminal, then press enter: `ssh-agent /bin/bash`
5. Type the following verbatim into the terminal, then press enter: `ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_ed25519`

### Mac users
1. Download the SSH key file that you were emailed
2. Open the terminal
3. Type the following command verbatim, replacing the entire section in brackets, including the brackets themselves. `cp ~/Downloads/{keyfile} ~/.ssh/id_ed25519`. For example, if my keyfile was called enzo-key, I would run `cp ~/enzo-key ~/.ssh/id_ed25519`.
4. Type the following verbatim into the terminal, then press enter: `ssh-agent /bin/bash`
5. Type the following verbatim into the terminal, then press enter: `ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_ed25519`

### Windows users
1. Download the SSH key file that you were emailed
2. Open downloads folder in your file explorer
3. Right click on you keyfile, and select copy
4. Type the following into the address bar in your computer: `%UserProfile%\.ssh`
5. If you receive an error message, type the following `%UserProfile%`, then right click and create a folder called `.ssh`. Then return to step 4.
6. Right-click and paste the file you copied in step 3
7. Rename the file to `id_ed25519`
8. Open the search bar and enter `optional features`
9. Use the search bar to search for `ssh`
10. If you see `OpenSSH Client` in the list, skip to step 15
11. If you do not, select `add a feature`
12. Again, search for `SSH`
13. Select `OpenSSH Client`, and press install
14. Once installation is finished, proceed
15. Open the search bar and enter services
16. In the services menu, find the entry labeled `OpenSSH Authentication Agent`
17. Right click on it, and select properties
18. In the properties menu, changed the startup option from `Disabled` to `Automatic`
19. Use the search bar to open `PowerShell`
20. Type `ssh-add`

## Phase 3: Testing your connection
Your username for the server is your first initial, and the entirety of your last name. For example, if your name is Bob Smith, your username would be bsmith. In your terminal of choice, type `ssh {username}@ssh.apcsp.io`. Again, remember to substitute your username for the brackets. You should get a message telling you that you have successfully connected. **If you have not, STOP IMMEDIATELY AND ASK FOR HELP**. The server is set to lock out an IP address after five incorrect login attempts for security purposes. If you try after you have been rejected, you could lock out the entire school.

## Phase 4: VScode SSH configuration
1. Open VScode
2. Open the extensions marketplace (3 connected squares, with one disconnected)
3. In the search bar, type `Remote - SSH`
4. Select the first result, and press install
5. In the bottom right hand corner of the screen, click on the green square
6. In the menu that appears, select `Connect to Host...`
7. Select `add a new host`, and press enter
8. Enter `ssh {username}@ssh.apcsp.io`. Again, remember to substitute your username for the brackets.
9. Select the first option in the next menu
10. Select connect in the window that appears
11. Select `Linux` under remote host platform
12. Wait for setup to complete

Congratulations! If you have reached this point, setup is complete, and you are ready to code!